thank you for purchasing Cedar Valley
handy panels this video will cover the
basic types of installation to help you
install your new panels before you start
let's go over the tools you will need
you will need a hammer a saw a
caulking gun tape measure a level a
1-inch stainless steel or staples or
Brad nails and most importantly safety
glasses additionally on some projects
you might need a chop saw a chalk line
stain and a carpenter square today we
will cover a couple of basic
installations on the Cedar Valley Handy
panels if your installation involves
something not covered in this video
please call us at the factoring we will
gladly help you here
we are installing Handy panels on the
exterior of a home standard building
codes will apply because this siding is
considered lap siding by the uniformed
building code standards basic rules of
thumb our panels must be six inches
above the ground or one inch above roofs
index panels are nailed a maximum of 16
inches on center into the wall studs or
1/2 inch plywood shear
a code approved moisture barrier is
required directly behind handy panels
proper flashing of the corners windows
and doors is required make sure the wall
is clean and clear remove any
obstructions that would keep the Handy
panels from laying flat against the wall
remove old siding we have read the
installation instructions from the box
so let's put on our safety glasses and
get started first we make sure the wall
is prepared for new siding the wall must
have a code approved moisture barrier
sometimes called house wrap if you tore
off old siding replace the old house
wrap as well on this area we're
installing in a gable Cedar Valley also
offers pre-made shingle corners if you
like in all cases the corners and trim
must be installed first that's because
the Handy panels are butted directly to
all trim we install the starter strip
horizontally and the Handy panel will
sit right on top of it make sure it's
level and tack it in place where you
want the bottom of the first row to land
if you have a chalk line or string level
you can use that as a guide to install
the starter horizontally so we will use
our for installation steps for the
instructions measure cut caulk nail
first we measure the distance and mark
it on our handy panel then we cut a
handy panel to that measurement you can
check the fit before you caulk
when we are sure that piece fits tightly
we'll use our caulk gun to put a quarter
inch bead where the cut edge of the
plywood backer sits against the trim if
your piece is too short set it aside
there will be other places you can
utilize it
set the panel in place tightly against
the trim piece and nail properly
note we are blind nailing the Handy
panels the best way to ensure this is to
keep the nail right at 2 inches from the
very top of the Handy panel so the next
row panels should cover the nail heads
start 1 inch in from each edge space
your nails no more than 16 inches apart
the Handy panel kit comes with an 8 D
ring shank sighting nail that is paid at
a cedar brown color you need to fasten
lower on the panel make sure to use
these painted nails now as you move
across the wall you will see that the
overlapping end joints on the full handi
panels provide a seamless appearance
here's how the ends go together don't
forget one inch in from each edge and a
maximum distance of 16 inches apart so
if your piece is 20 inches wide you'll
need three nails continue to the
opposite corner and save the unused end
of the last panel as a starter piece for
the next row that's the basics you have
just installed your first handy panel
continue up the wall until you are
complete now let's look at some other
errors and how to properly install handy
panels around windows cut the panels to
fit tightly under and over windows you
will have to cut the Pandy panel
horizontally as you measure and cut for
these areas be careful long cuts like
these are the hardest to make sometimes
securing a guide to the panel will give
you a perfectly straight cut so my piece
is cut but now the shingles may be loose
cutting horizontally means the glue line
at the bottom or the staple line at the
top are gone we want to re fasten
whichever part of the shingle that is
loose to the plywood backer I suggest a
stainless steel 1-inch brad nail or a
staple to hold these loose ends to the
plywood backer if installing in the
Gables or dormers of your house that
diagonal cuts made at the intersection
of the roof are treated the same way as
window cuts corners if your project
involves two corners Cedar Valley makes
a matching 90 degree outside corner for
you if you use our corners start each
row by installing the corner first level
the corner then place one in nail 1/2
inch from each edge
once nailed lightly caulk the plywood
edge trim a handy panel square and but
the Handy panel tightly to the corner
piece nail as before when we have a run
between a corner and a piece of trim
just measure cut to fit check the fit
caulk and nail like before as you work
through your Handy panel boxes you may
have some pieces that without factory
end joints on either side areas like
these are a great place to utilize your
cut pieces of Handy panel so there you
have the basics of a handy panel
installation some final things to
remember are check with your building
department on any project before
starting a building permit may be
required a code approved moisture
barrier is needed directly behind handy
panel siding handy panels are not
approved for roofing playhouses sheds
and gazebos are exempt from this rule if
you have any installation questions
please call us at the factory and ask
for a technical rep we are happy to talk
with you about the suitability and use
of our Handy panel siding for your
project thanks again for your purchase
of Cedar Valley's Handy panel siding
enjoy your project